# Mixfix Rewriting Algorithm
tags: lang-design, parsers

Remember that the goal of these mixfixes is to be easily understandable.
In particular, the set of mixfixes in operation at any given time must form a totally ordered set under precedence;
  this differs from mixfix designs which allow them to be partially-ordered.

Anyway, overlapping is hard.
I've screwed it up before with simple intervals, and I'm sure to screw it up again-and-again when there are two intervals involved.

In the case of mixfixes, the intervals are:
  * the rewrite bounds: the section of the eexpr list which will be replaced with a single mixfix node
  * the keyword bounds: the minimal section of the eexpr list which contains all the keywords that distinguish that instance of the mixfix

The algorithm for determining the order in which mixfixes will be rewritten MUST
  be simple enough that a human can accidentally memorize it and subsequently perform in their head, preferably as easily as muscle memory.

```
from lowest to highest precedence:
  match all mixfixes
  if are no matches at this precedence level, continue to the next
  pairwise on those matches:
    if they overlap by rewrite bounds:
      if they have the same left/right associativity:
        keep the left-/rightmost determined by keyword bounds
        drop the other
      otherwise fail
  at this point, no two distinct matches overlap:
    rewrite all of them independently

determine left-/rightmost by keyword bounds:
  if the left/right bound of one is strictly before/after the other:
    return that one
  otherwise the left/right bounds are equal:
    fail
```

This is trivially a conservative extension of "normal" operator precedence rules,
  where normal means only unary and binary operations.
In the case of the ternary conditional—the only mainstream operator that isn't "normal",
  this is still a conservative extension.

I think the question may come into play when operator precedence is used to detect the syntax of the language.
Even then, `let`-`in` has the same form as the ternary conditional, so I'm reasonably hopeful.
Operators which enclose their operands are likewise handled very naturally (i.e. avoids mis-matched brackets).

As a last resort, parenthesis (or other grouping syntax) can be used to disambiguate any operators I've found to be "overlapping" which might actually be intuitively unambiguous.
So, even if I get these rules wrong, there's a forward-compatible escape hatch if I need to extend the rules.
