# Design Goals for a HoTT-based Language
tags: lang-design, hott, docs, plan

I'm thinking about what exactly would distinguish my dependently-typed language from any other.
In particular, I'm not going to have (in the foreseeable future) any new type system features; perhaps a new combination of existing techniques, but that's no very strongly distinguishing.

I think my key idea is:
  > Stop putting documentation in comments.
  > Documentation is code.

This HoTT-lang should be capable of being compiled to a textbook.
Admittedly, the most natural form such a textbook might make is one of those awful
  "Here are the axioms, now I prove some theorems. I assume you know where I'm going with this and why."
  ones.
Still, some guidance on technical writing would go a long way to helping people write good documentation.

Here are some features of the documentation language that should be present:
  * Documentation must be able to attach to code objects to provide API docs, but
      must not be required to attach to any object.
    This allows free-form documentation sections for e.g. introductions, conceptual overviews, and so on.
  * Reorder code and documentation for rendering.
    This is as opposed to literate programming, where the code, even remarkably boring code, but occur exactly in the same order as the source, leading to garbage like
    ```
    We've got to import a bunch of things.
    Skip over this
    > import Prelude hiding (lookup)
    > 
    > import Data.Map (Map)
    > import Data.Symbol (Symbol)
    >
    > import qualified Data.Map as Map
    > …
    ```
    Incidentally, literate programming also doesn't abide by the "documentation is code" philosophy/
  * Certain common textbook typesetting techniques that are not always available in markdown/markup:
    * footnotes
    * references/citations/bibliography
    * asides (warnings, notes, and so on)
    * collapsible sections (since the textbook can be on a computer)
  * Documentation snippets that can be either linked to or included in-line.
    If a particular function has warnings, similar functions will likely have the same warning;
      in such cases it is better to document the warning once, and use it in several places.
  * Additionally, documentation snippets should be parameterizable (i.e. documentation functions).
    This way, we can write documentation that is parameterized by function references, the number of nested headings it is included under, and so on.
    If documentation is code, then we should strive for documentation reusability just like code reusability.
  * Distinction between public documentation, and internal documentation.
    The former is for users of the library, while the latter contains additional information useful to _contributors_.
  * Entire modules might be _only_ documentation.

## The Plan™

So, how am I going to put this together?
For one thing, I'm not confident enough to just choose a dependent type system and know that it will be expressive/performant/ergonomic/relevant.
Heck, I'm not even confident enough to just implement one (at least, not one that has good error reporting).

However, I _can_ build the documentation infrastructure independently of the language it will be documenting.
In fact, this is probably a good thing, since that infrastructure might be able to be reused across various languages.
(NOTE to self: that means that in addition to an ABT standard data format, I should also have a standard format for attaching documentation to bits of API; not sure how to do that).

  1. Build a _really_ stupid language, as long as it has definitions.
    Even just simple integer arithmetic is enough at first.
    (But I do have to PoC link-to-definition/uses).
  2. Make sure we can compile each definition into markup (pandoc, but maybe just html or markdown if it comes to it)
  3. Build a simple documentation language that goes alongside the definitions.
    Perhaps just text at first, but I want to iterate toward a bunch of semantic markup combinators/
  4. Build a simple module language around what we have so far.
    Just named import/export is enough for now, but I will want documentation to be able to support parametric modules.
    Also, at this point I am still only generating docs for a single file.
    (I might have to do dynamic (client- or server-side) pages for this: substitute arguments into parametric modules.)
    Remember, I will need a way to import/export documentation as well.
  5. Create a system that can link separately-generated documentation into a documentation archive.
    Also, the linker will need to handle dynamic liking at some point (i.e. instead of linking within an archive, link to an internet url).
  6. Create a package language that can create a stand-alone document (modulo intentionally external references): a website, a pdf, or whatever.
    Really what I need is just some way to make a table of contents (which documents are included, what order do they go in, and what should be on the "index page").
  7. Iterate on the documentation language and the language being documented, ad infinitum.
  8. Okay, I will want a package manager as well at some point, not just a packager.

I do think this bottom-up strategy is important, even if I often go top-down.
In this case, the architecture grown with a top-down approach will likely end up with the only way to generate docs as through the package manager.
I want to ensure that documentation generation is a pure function of a single file, that linking documentation into an archive is a pure function of the docs and archives to link, and that publishing a standalone document is a pure function of an archive.
With that architecture, we can create any workflow we want when we wish for something more custom; even when it comes to supporting a standard workflow, that might be implementable with a simple shell script rather than a full-on monolith.

What would be really nice is if I could integrate an interpreter into the rendered documentation.
That is, save out a bunch of scopes, and in various places you can open up an interpreter inside that scope.

Since I'm thinking about interpreters, I suddenly remember that different interpreters may have different primitives.
That challenge reminds me that I'll also want documentation to work cross-platform even when the code is platform-dependent.
Right now if I look up docs for the file system in hackage, it only shows the posix modules, not the windows modules.
